== Hacking MacRuby

Please read this file if you are considering hacking MacRuby. It provides
tips in order to better hack MacRuby and also suggestions on how to submit a
patch.

=== Coding Style

You need to conform to the following coding style in order to get a patch
accepted:

* Indentation starts with 4 space characters, then 1 tabulation (hard), then
  1 tabulation (hard) followed by 4 space characters, then 2 tabulations
  (hard), etc.

  This is the indentation style that was inherited from the original Ruby source
  code, so we are preserving it.

* Insert a new line between the type and the name of a function during its
  definition and start the opening brace on a new line too.

    static void
    do_something(void)
    {
        ...
    }

* A space must be inserted between keywords and their operand and branches must
  be written so that an ending brace is always at the end of a line.

    if (some_boolean) {
        ...
    }
    else {
        ...
    }

* Branches with only one expression must still be covered by braces, even
  if it's not mandatory in the C language. Also, do not write one-liner
  branches.

    if (some_boolean)
        do_something(); /* bad */
    if (some_boolean) do_something(); /* bad */

    if (some_boolean) {
        /* good */
        do_something();
    }

* A space must be inserted between operators operands.

    int i, x = 40 + 2;
    for (i = 0; i < x; i++) {
        ...
    }

* Do not insert a space between a function call and its first brace.

    do_something();

* A space must be inserted after every argument in a function call.

    do_something(x, y, z);

* Never pass a non-boolean value as it is to a conditional expression.

    void *ptr = do_something();
    if (!ptr) {
        /* bad */
    }

    if (ptr != NULL) {
        /* good */
    }

* Respect the 80 columns rule when possible. You can violate this rule in case
  the line contains a long string.

* In case you need to split multiple conditional expressions into multiple
  lines, make sure there is a new line before the operator(s).

    if (do_something ||
        do_something2()) {
        /* bad */
        do_something3();
    }

    if (do_something()
        || do_something2()) {
        /* good */
        do_something3();
    }

=== Code Design

* Please declare variables as you use them. The whole project is built under the
  C99 mode so newer constructs are also recommended (such as the definition of
  iterator variables in 'for' loops).

* Please use the 'const' qualifier for scalar variables that are not supposed to
  change.

* Use 'assert' or 'abort' for situations that should never happen. It is not a
  problem if you abuse of this, just be clever.

* Do not use 'alloca' unless you know what you are doing.

=== Debugging

==== Environment variables

The following environment variables might help you debug easy bugs.

* GC_DISABLE: set it to any value to disable the GC.

* GC_DEBUG: set it to any value to enable GC debugging on $stderr.

* VM_DISABLE_RBO: set it to any value to disable the load of .rbo files.

* VM_DISABLE_INTERPRETER: set it to any value to disable the use of the
  builtin interpreter (generally used on cold paths).

* VM_DUMP_IR: set it to any value to dump the LLVM IR on $stderr before the
  program quits.

* VM_VERIFY_IR: set it to any value to force a LLVM module verification before
  the program quits.

* VM_STATS: set it to any value to collect then print compiler statistics
  before the program quits.

* VM_OPT_LEVEL: set it either to 0, 1, 2 or 3 to change the optimization level
  of the LLVM code generator.

* VM_KERNEL_PATH: specify a path to a kernel bitcode file to be used instead of
  the hardcoded one, when deserializing the main module. This is useful when
  cross-compiling Ruby code to a different architecture.

* DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH: in case you are debugging a Cocoa application, set this 
  variable to "." before starting gdb, and you won't have to re-install MacRuby
  every time you re-compile it.

* AUTO_USE_TLC: set this variable to 0 to disable the thread local collector.

==== GDB tricks

* Break on rb_exc_raise to intercept pure Ruby exceptions. You can use a
  conditional break point in case you only want to break if a specific
  exception class is being raised:
  (gdb) b rb_exc_raise
  Breakpoint 1 at 0x20c49ba5453254: file eval.c, line 312.
  (gdb) cond 1 *(void **)mesg == rb_eArgError

* To dump the LLVM IR:
  (gdb) p RoxorCompiler::shared->module->dump()

* To print the list of current active blocks:
  (gdb) p (char *)RoxorVM::current->debug_blocks()

* To print the list of current active exceptions:
  (gdb) p (char *)RoxorVM::current->debug_exceptions()

* To determine if a given object is thread-local:
  (gdb) p (int)gdb_is_local(<address>)

* To symbolize a Ruby address (named as ??) in the backtrace:
  (gdb) p (void)rb_symbolicate(<address>)

* To print the addresses of all memory objects of a given minimum size (useful
  when debugging memory leaks):
  (gdb) p (void)rb_print_memory_objects(<size>)

* To print the GC references of a given memory object:
  (gdb) info gc-references <address>
  
* To print the content of Ruby object:
  (gdb) rp <variable name of Ruby object>
  
  ex)
  (gdb) rp str
  $1 = "T_STRING:"
  $2 = {basic = {klass = 17183054944, flags = 0}, encoding = 0x40040a280, capacity_in_bytes = 6, length_in_bytes = 5, cached_length = 0, 
    bytes = 0x40049e640 "hello", flags = 0 '\0'}