= MacRuby Examples

This directory contains example applications written using MacRuby and using Cocoa and other Mac OS X frameworks. Below is a list of some of the examples and what each demonstrates:

+ABPresence+:: AddressBook and InstantMessage frameworks, NSTableView, notifications

+AnimatingViews+:: NSView animations, NSBox

+CircleView+:: NSView, event handling, NSAffineTransform, text layout and drawing

+DotView+:: NSView, event handling, drawing

+EmbedMacRuby+:: Embedding the MacRuby framework in a pure Cocoa application

+FlickrDemo+:: ImageKit and PubSub frameworks, NSTableView, NSToolbar

+MacOnRack+:: WebView, Rack (Ruby WebServer Interface)

+OutlineView+:: NSOutlineView

+PagePacker+:: PDFKit framework, NSView, dragging, scripting, printing, undo manager, notifications

+PathDemo+:: Path operations (circles, rectangles, Bézier paths)

+PhileasFrog+:: 2D video game (CALayer, CATransaction, CABasicAnimation, Cocoa wrapper, key controls, NSSound, NSTimer, CIFilter)

+RoundTransparentWindow+:: Custom-shaped NSWindow with transparent window content.

+Sketch+:: NSDocument architecture, NSUndoManager, NSBezierPath.

+Skreenics+:: QTKit, NSOperation, NSUserDefaults, NSValueTransformer, Drag and drop, Key-Value coding/observing, custom views / cells.

+Suru+:: Interface Builder, Core Data

+ViewModelDemo+:: NSView, NSTimer

+YamlTable+:: NSTableView, YAML, NSAlert, Sheet

You will also find some standalone scripts in the Scripts directory. These
files are meant to be run from the command line.

Several DTrace scripts are available in the DTrace directory. These scripts
should be executed from the command line.

The source code of all MacRuby examples, unless specified, is covered by the Ruby license, which can be found online at:
http://www.ruby-lang.org/en/LICENSE.txt
